# Notes for 1/9 - FDOC

## Questions we want to answer

### Correctness
1. How do we know the algorithm is correct? 
    - ex. We want to find the max value in the array. 
    - How do you know it will return the max value? 

### Runtime
2. What is the runtime? (We don’t mean the wall clock time because it depends on the input and changes machine to machine, and where the program is implemented ex in python or C). 
  - We know about primitive operations. These are basic operations: 
    * Assignment (`x = b`)
    * Basic arithmetic
    * Conditional/comparison (`if x < y`)
    * Indexing `A[5]`
    * `x = A[5]`

  - Can be extremely precise. (We usually don’t do this and only care about the biggest term. Cover *why* in week 2.)
    * ex. $3n + \log_2(n) + 26$
    
      If you put in n = 10, they this equation will give you the exact number of primitive operations. 

#### Example
Given an array A, and a value k, find the index of k in A. 

psuedo-code: 
```
for i = 1 to n: 
    if A[i] == k: return i
```

1. Provide the *correctness argument*. 

    1. k is in the array at index i* 

    2. For loop runs from i = 1 to n. It will sweep the entire array. Therefore ... 

    3. i* has to be in the range 1 to n 

    Question: What if k is not in the array, then this argument is not true? 

2. What is the *run time* of this operation? 

    1. for loop → runs n time 

    2. if statement → n iterations of the if statement 

    3. $O(n+n) = O(2n) \simeq O(n)$

**Now assume your array is sorted. How does this change the runtime?**

psuedo-code: 


```python
i = 1 
j = n

while True:
    mid = floor((i+j)/2)

    if A[mid] == k: 
        return mid

    elif A[mid] < k: 
        i = mid + 1 
    
    elif A[mid] > j: 
        j = mid - 1
```

1. What is the *correctness argument*?: 

    1. “Drop” half of array where k is not inside: 

    2. If k is in the left half of array (k < mid), which means we drop the right half vice versa

2. *Run time*? 

    We start off with n, then we drop half so now we are at $n/2$, drop another half we are at, $n/2^2$, ... , $n/2^k$

    So $n/2^k \le 1$ 
    
    -> $n = 2^k$, solving for n. 
    
    -> $k = \log_2(n) = \log(n)$

    - **log(n)**

        * Why? Because after every iteration you are cutting the array in half. Even if the worst case scenario, where you have to end up “splitting” the array until you get to one value (k). You still split the array in half first and then split that section in half again and so on. 
        
        Note: In Big O notation, we write "log" without specifying a base becuase the base does not matter.





